# Advanced Programming - Lab A

This lab introduces you to some very basic elements of C++ programming. As you progress through this year, you’ll be learning a lot about the intricacies of the C++ programming language, that will hopefully prove invaluable both during your career (assuming you become a C++ developer) and also as technical background for the likely questions you’ll face in interviews.
To assist you in remembering these intricacies you'll be using a Lab Book to record your observations and findings as you discover the language, solutions to common problems, and even how you solved a problematic bug.

## GIT

All the source code for this lab exercise is on the GIT

## Lab Book

An example of the Lab book can be found on the GIT within this Lab

---

## Q1. Hello World

The following code displays "Hello World" inside of a console window.

```c++
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main (int argc, char **argv) {
   cout << "Hello World" << endl;
   return 0;
}
```

The first line of code tells the preprocessor that we would like to be able to read and write to the console window.  The second line of code allows for easy use of the `std` functions.

The rest of the code is the `main()` procedure.  Notice that the procedure takes two parameters, namely `argc` and `argv`.  The parameter `argv` contains any parameters that where passed to the program when it was started, and the parameter `argc` holds the number of parameters passed to the program when it was started.

Inside of the `main()` procedure the code sends the phrase "Hello World" and an end of line character to the `cout` stream which appears in the console window.

Locate the **Solution Explorer** within Visual Studio and select the **Hello World** project. Right click on this project and select **Build**. This should compile and link the project. Now run the Hello World program.

Change between **Debug** and **Release** mode. Compile again and rerun the program.

---

## Using libraries [Not required in Lab Book]

Comment out the statement:

```c++
#include <iostream>
```

Compile the program.

What is the effect?

Replace the statement and continue.

Now remove the statement

```c++
using namespace std;
```

Compile the program.  

What is the effect?  

Replace the statement and continue.

---

## Q2. Creating a new project

Create a new Empty C++ Console project called **Temperature** by using the project application wizard.  This is done by right clicking on the **500083-Lab-A** solution in the **Solution Explorer** Window and selecting **Add » New Project**.

NB: Be careful to select a **C++, Empty Project**

Create a new cpp file within the temperature project by right clicking on the **Temperature** project in the **Solution Explorer** Window and select **Add » Add New Item**.

Write a program to input a Fahrenheit measurement, convert it and output a Celsius value.  The conversion formula is

```c++
celsius = 5/9 * (fahrenheit-32)
```

NB: You may want to select the **Temperature** project as the default project; to do this right click on the **Temperature** project and select **Set as Startup Project**.

Also what happens if you dividing two integers?

---

## Clean up [Not required in Lab Book]

Open the directory that contains your code.  You will notice there are several files and a few folders that have been generated by Visual Studio.  Most of these are generated during the build process and some of these files are quite large.  Compare the total size of files/folders after the build process to that from the original downloaded lab files.  The build process may change the size of the files from a few KB to several MB.  This can get quite large as you increase the complexity of your software and you can soon occupy a large amount of storage space.

Therefore it is good practice to clean your Visual Studio solution when you are archiving your code (and particularly when submitting your ACW!) so that the build files are removed.  Your source code and other files will remain intact so that you can build the software again at a later time.

In Visual Studio, select **Build » Clean Solution**.  This will remove the build files and reduce the size of files somewhat. One more file that can be deleted is a database file that Visual Studio creates that can be quite large.  This file will have the same name as the project and will have the file extension (**.db**) and is usually the largest file of all.  You can safely delete this file once you have closed Visual Studio (but first backup your code etc. just in case something goes wrong).

Now clean up your two projects.

Commit the solution to your Git repository, as explained last year.

---

## Q3. Types

Using the “Hello World” program as a starting point, write a program that prints out the size in bytes of each of the fundamental data types in C++.

Hint:  Make use of the `sizeof()` operator, that returns the size of any data type.

Remember to include both the `signed` and `unsigned` versions of each data type.

---

## Q4. Floating point precision

In the lectures we discussed the precision of floating point numbers within C++, and how due to this precision the equality operator was unreliable.

Write a simple program that includes the lines:

```c++
double x = 10.0;
double y = 10.0;
if (x == y)
      cout << “X and Y are identical” << endl;
```

Did the program execute as expected?

Now try `y = 20.0  / 2.0` and execute the program again.  
Then try a more complex calculation for `y` e.g.

```c++
const double x = 100000.123456789;
const double a = 200000.123456789;
double y = (x + a) / x;
double z = 1.0 + (a / x);
if (y == z) 
   cout << “y and z are identical” << endl;
```

Now try different values for `x` and `a`

Printing out the values of `x`, `y` and `z`, may be useful in helping you form an opinion of what is happening.

Once you’re confident you understand the logic, investigate:

```c++
double z = x / y;
```

How small does `y` have to be before you get a “divide by zero” error?
Does the value of `x` affect the result?

---

## Q5. C#/C++ Iteration Comparison (for loop)

In the lectures we have looked at constructs and iterators.

Below is some C# code that calculates the factorial of a number (see <https://www.mathsisfun.com/numbers/factorial.html> for details of a factorial).

```c#
static void Main(string[] args)
{
   int factorialNumber = 5;
   int factorialTotal = 1;

   for(int n = 2; n <= factorialNumber; ++n)
   {
      factorialTotal *= n;
   }

   System.Console.WriteLine(factorialTotal);
}
```

Port the above C# code in to C++ using the provided Main.cpp file.

**[LAB BOOK - Add your C++ code to your lab book.  Then reflect on what you have to change (or not change) from C# to C++ in terms of the iteration]**

---

## Q6. Calculate Average using Iteration (while loop)

Using a while loop (or do-while loop), calculate the average value of values provided by the user from the console (cin).
You should calculate the average after the user either enters a negative number or the user enters a non-number value (e.g. a letter).

The following C++ code will get an int value from the user.

```c++
cout << "Please enter an int value, then press Enter" << endl;
int n = 0;
cin >> n;
```

**[LAB BOOK - Add your C++ code to your lab book.  Then reflect on what you have learnt]**

---
